The retinotectal projection, in which the axons of retinal ganglion
cells form an ordered map in the optic tectum, is an important
developmental system that has been studied for many decades. There is
a large body of evidence, consisting of surgical and genetic
manipulations, that give insight into how it behaves. Experimental
work has uncovered a number of mechanisms that are involved in aspects
of the mapping. However, a single, consistent theoretical framework
has yet to describe all the patterns that are formed. Sperry's
chemoaffinity theory provides an account of the wildtype
pattern. Gierer formalised and extended this theory to incorporate
competition to account for a subset of surgical manipulation
experiments, but it was never tested against the full range of
surgical manipulations. Other theoretical and computational studies
have been partially successful in accounting for surgical
manipulations, but to date, no single theory, operating only by local
interactions, has accounted for every manipulation.  We present a
review and reimplementation of some of these existing models. We then
show that a two-dimensional model of the retinotectal projection in
which orthogonal pairs of opposing tectal ligand gradients combined
with retinal gradients of receptors form Gierer's potential functions
accounts for the full range of surgical manipulations. Lastly, we
speculate on possible extensions to the way in which the
receptor-ligand interactions are treated that would account for more
recent genetic manipulation experiments.
