10. A unified model of retinotectal map development

James SS, Wilson SP

The axons of retinal ganglion cells form an ordered map of the retina
in the optic tectum. Surgical and genetic experiments have revealed
several key mechanisms that contribute to retinotectal map
development, and computational modelling studies have demonstrated how
maps can be shaped by their interactions. Models derived from Sperry's
classic chemoaffinity theory can reproduce retinotopy, and Gierer
later showed how an extension to include competition between growing
axons could also account for a subset of the disordered maps that have
resulted from surgical manipulation. Further extensions have each
accounted for additional datapoints, but none has been able to explain
the full range of maps observed experimentally. Here we present a
unified model of retinotectal development, assuming only local
interactions between growing axons, which can account for the full
range of maps resulting from surgical manipulation. This model extends
the 'potential functions' of Gierer's original to describe
self-organisation across a 2D cortical sheet, and it represents a
coordination of axonal growth by orthogonal pairs of opposing ligand
gradients in the tectum and corresponding receptor gradients in the
retina. In addition, we present progress towards accounting for the
full range of maps that have resulted from genetic manipulation, by
incorporating a mechanistic description of receptor ligand
interactions.
